YOU ARE about to have the profound pleasure of reading one
of the truly great books in the history of the world. Not only
is it a spiritual monument—an essential scripture of Hinduism,
recited daily for two millennia and to this very day, whose
teachings have spread throughout Asia and around the globe—
it is also a literary masterpiece, the linchpin of a great epic of
war and peace, honor and disgrace, loyalty and betrayal. It is a
book people everywhere in the world return to again and again
throughout their lives for insight into the nature of reality.
For the Hindu philosophers, the Bhagavad Gita was always
of great importance. It is one of the three central texts of
Vedanta, the other two being the Brahma Sutras and the
Upanishads. From the ninth century CE onwards, philosophers
such as Shankara, Ramanuja, Madhva, and Nimbarka in the
Vedanta tradition, and Abhinavagupta in the Shaiva tradition,
wrote learned commentaries on the Gita. It was also trans-
lated from Sanskrit into other Indian languages, for example,
Jnaneshvara’s Marathi version in the thirteenth century. As a
work of literature, the epic was immensely important to the
cultural life of India and even beyond her shores, notably in
Indonesia, where parts were translated into Old Javanese.

It was during the British Raj that the Gita first achieved
worldwide fame. Many educated Indians were struggling to
defend Hinduism against the onslaught of western culture, and
gradually the Gita was considered to embody the essential spirit
and deepest truths of Hinduism. The Hindu reformer Ram
Mohun Roy referred to the Gita as “the essence of all shastras,”
or the essence of all scriptures. By 1912, C. F. Andrews could
claim that the Gita had become a common and well-read
scripture for the whole of educated India. It also appealed to
another, and very different group of people, the Theosophists.
It was the Theosophists who introduced the Gita to that most
famous of all modern Indians: Mohandas K. Gandhi.
Since Gandhi was introduced to the Gita by the Theoso-
phists, he learned to read it in an allegorical way. The mighty
battle was really a struggle for truth—which he saw as another
word for God—to be sought through love, and love ruled out
violence. Ahimsa, or nonviolence, became the key to Gandhi’s
understanding of the Gita, which he called his “spiritual dic-
tionary.” He was particularly fascinated by two words: apari-
graha (nonpossession), which suggested the renunciation of
money and property to avoid cramping the life of the spirit;
and samabhava (equability), which asked him to transcend
pain or pleasure, victory or defeat, and to work without hope
of success or fear of failure. The Gita became an inspiration to
Gandhi and millions of his followers, a manual of devotion and
action in the modern world.
The Gita also found a rapt audience in the West, and a fas-
cinating global cross-fertilization followed. It appealed both
to the German Romantics, notably Schlegel, Humboldt, and
Goethe, and to the American Transcendentalists, a group in
New England who thought that insights which transcended
I NTRODUCTION xi
logic and experience would reveal the deepest truths. The Gita
was first translated into English in India in 1785 by Charles
Wilkins, a merchant with the East India Company, and his
translation made a deep impression on the Transcendentalist’s
leader, Ralph Waldo Emerson. Emerson’s poem, “Brahma,”
elegantly captures some of the essence of the Gita:
If the red slayer think he slays,
Or if the slain think he is slain,
They know not well the subtle ways
I keep, and pass, and turn again.
Far or forgot to me is near;
Shadow and sunlight are the same;
The vanished gods to me appear;
and one to me are shame and fame.
They reckon ill who leave me out;
When me they fly, I am the wings;
I am the doubter and the doubt,
And I the hymn the Brahmin sings.
The strong gods pine for my abode,
And pine in vain the sacred Seven;
But thou, meek lover of the good!
Find me, and turn thy back on heaven.
The poem is based on a verse found in both the Gita and
the Katha Upanishad. (A century later, another great poet,
T. S. Eliot, also had a lifelong interest in Indian philosophy
and incorporated it into his poetry as well.) Emerson made
xii I NTRODUCTION
the Gita required reading for all those who were in rebellion
against evangelical Christianity. Thus, for the first time, the
Gita became part of a counterculture.
Another Transcendentalist, Henry David Thoreau, was a
tremendous enthusiast of the Gita, but his interest was also a
practical one. He incorporated a version of the Gita’s teaching
on Karma Yoga into his own lifestyle and philosophy. In 1849,
he launched the idea of civil disobedience—an idea that influ-
enced Gandhi’s political thinking. Thus, an Indic idea passed
through a Western mind and returned transformed to India.
(Similarly, the Theosophical Society was founded in New York
City, moved its headquarters to India, and was a catalyst in the
revival of Hinduism and Buddhism.) And of course, Gandhi’s
ideas flowed back westward to inspire two other giants of the
twentieth century, Martin Luther King Jr. and Nelson Mandela.
The current tidal wave of interest in the Gita, in Yoga, and
in things Indian began in the 1960s with the efflorescence
of another counterculture, the paperback revolution in book
publishing, the new, far-reaching curricula of a higher edu-
cational system undergoing explosive growth, and the arrival
in the West of gurus such as Swami Vishnudevananda, Swami
Satchidananda, and A. C. Bhaktivedanta, all following in the
footsteps of Swami Vivekananda.
Today, the Bhagavad Gita is firmly established around the
world as a true classic. But not a dusty old classic: It is aston-
ishingly fresh and inspiring, even to readers who do not share
the underlying assumptions of the text. Knowledge and self-
discipline are still virtues. Selflessness is as sound today as
it was then. Doing one’s duty regardless of consequences is
needed now more than ever. We may not share the Gita’s views
on caste or endorse the social system it supports, but we don’t
I NTRODUCTION xiii
have to. We are free to choose, and the Gita offers a number
of choices. Its core of universal values and its poetic grandeur
make the Gita a living classic.
I mentioned earlier that the Gita is the linchpin of a great
epic, and that epic is the Mahabharata, or Great Story of the
Bharatas. With nearly one hundred thousand verses divided
into eighteen books, it is one of the longest epic poems in the
world—fully seven times longer than the Iliad and the Odyssey
combined, or three times longer than the Bible. It is in fact a
whole library of stories that exerted a tremendous influence on
the people and literature of India.
The central story of the Mahabharata is a conflict over suc-
cession to the throne of Hastinapura, a kingdom just north
of modern Delhi that was the ancestral realm of a tribe most
commonly known as the Bharatas. (India was at that time
divided amongst many small, and often warring, kingdoms.)
The struggle is between two groups of cousins, the Pandavas,
or sons of Pandu, and the Kauravas, or descendants of Kuru.
Because of his blindness, Dhritarashtra, the elder brother of
Pandu, is passed over as king, the throne going instead to Pandu.
However, Pandu renounces the throne, and Dhritarashtra
assumes power after all. The sons of Pandu—Yudhishthira,
Bhima, Arjuna, Nakula, and Sahadeva—grow up together
with their cousins, the Kauravas. Due to enmity and jealousy,
the Pandavas are forced to leave the kingdom when their
father dies. During their exile, they jointly marry Draupadi
and befriend their cousin Krishna, who from then on accom-
panies them. They return and share sovereignty with the
Kauravas, but have to withdraw to the forest for thirteen years
when Yudhishthira loses all his possessions in a game of dice
with Duryodhana, the eldest of the Kauravas. When they
xiv I NTRODUCTION
return from the forest to demand their share of the kingdom
back, Duryodhana refuses. This means war. Krishna acts as
counselor to the Pandavas. The Gita is found right here, with
the two armies facing each other and ready for battle. The
battle rages for eighteen days and ends with the defeat of the
Kauravas. All the Kauravas die; only the five Pandava brothers
and Krishna survive. The six set out for heaven together, but
all die on the way, except Yudhishthira, who reaches the gates
of heaven accompanied only by a small dog, who turns out to
be an incarnation of the god Dharma. After tests of faithful-
ness and constancy, Yudhishthira is reunited in heaven with his
brothers and Draupadi in eternal bliss.
It is within this enormous epic—the sizable book you hold
in your hands is well less than one percent of the Mahabharata
that we find the Bhagavad Gita, or the Song of the Lord, most
commonly referred to simply as the Gita. It is found in the sixth
book of the epic, just before the great battle between the Pandavas
and the Kauravas. The greatest hero of the Pandavas, Arjuna,
has pulled up his chariot in the middle of the battlefield between
the two opposing armies. He is accompanied by Krishna, who
acts as his charioteer. In a fit of despondency, Arjuna throws
down his bow and refuses to fight, deploring the immorality of
the coming war. It is a moment of supreme drama: time stands
still, the armies are frozen in place, and God speaks.
The situation is extremely grave. A great kingdom is about
to self-destruct in internecine warfare, making a mockery of
dharma, the eternal moral laws and customs that govern the
universe. Arjuna’s objections are well founded: He is the victim
of a moral paradox. On the one hand, he is facing persons who,
according to dharma, deserve his respect and veneration. On
the other hand, his duty as a warrior demands that he kill them.
I NTRODUCTION xv
Yet no fruits of victory would seem to justify such a heinous
crime. It is, seemingly, a dilemma without solution. It is this
state of moral confusion that the Gita sets out to mend.
When Arjuna refuses to fight, Krishna has no patience
with him. Only when he realizes the extent of Arjuna’s despon-
dency does Krishna change his attitude and start teaching
the mysteries of dharmic action in this world. He intro-
duces Arjuna to the structure of the universe, the concepts
of prakriti, primordial nature, and the three gunas, the prop-
erties that are active in prakriti. Then he takes Arjuna on a
tour of philosophical ideas and ways of salvation. He discusses
the nature of theory and action, the importance of ritual, the
ultimate principle, Brahman, all the while gradually disclosing
his own nature as the highest god. This part of the Gita culmi-
nates in an overwhelming vision: Krishna allows Arjuna to see
his supernal form, the Vishvarupa, which strikes terror into
Arjuna’s heart. The rest of the Gita deepens and supplements
the ideas presented before the epiphany—the importance of
self-control and faith, of equanimity and unselfishness, but
above all, of bhakti, or devotion. Krishna explains to Arjuna
how he can obtain immortality by transcending the proper-
ties which qualify not only primordial matter, but also human
character and behavior. Krishna also emphasizes the impor-
tance of doing one’s duty, declaring that it is better to do one’s
own duty without distinction than to do another’s duty well.
In the end, Arjuna is convinced. He picks up his bow and is
ready to fight.
Knowing a couple of things will make your reading easier.
The first is that the Gita is a conversation within a conversa-
tion. Dhritarashtra begins it by asking a question, and that is
the last we hear out of him. He is answered by Sanjaya, who